Data come from NOAA's Deep Sea Coral Research & Technology Program. This specific dataset is from the April 2015 Okeanos Explorer cruise EX-15-02-L3 to Puerto Rico. The cruise characterized deep-sea coral and sponge communities. The original version of the dataset can be found at https://deepseacoraldata.noaa.gov/DatasetID_Table/DatasetID_Table.html. It was modified slightly for the purposes of this project but the actual data were not been altered in any way.

We made the data untidy so the dataset started untidy. The Coordinates column contained two variables (Latitude and Longitude), the date contained 3 variables, the event ID contained both the cruise number and dive number, and some columns had numbers in their names. After tidying and cleaning the data, our dataset is tidy. Every column is a variable, every row is an observation, and every cell is a single value. Column headers have been renamed so they are variable names and not values. One variable is stored per column. Therefore, our data are tidy.

At first glance, the dataset seems FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable). The dataset is easy to find and access on NOAA's website through the Deep-Sea Coral Data Portal and there are dashboards for every cruise. The data are interoperable, as the vocabulary of language used for column variable names are straightforward and intuitive. The data are reusable as well, since NOAA has provided links to use the datasets and they are easy to download as csv files.

However, the website states that each dataset have ISO compliant metadata, but I did not find this to be the case. The metadata could only be downloaded as xml files, were hard to access, and did not include all the pertinent variable information! So although the metadata were technically available and accessible, they were not released in a clear way and did not provided the necessary information. This eliminates several FAIR sub-principles, including F2) data are described by rich metadata, F3) metadata clearly and explicitly include the identifier of the data it describes, and R1) metadata are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes. 

On a broad scale, the dataset somewhat complies with the FAIR principles. Data are registered in a searchable resource (F4) and the protocol regarding the cruises and sample collection is open, free, and implementable (A1.1). However, a more detailed analysis reveals that the dataset is not entirely FAIR.


